README.md, before:

# Signalilo

Signalilo is our Alertmanager to Icinga2 bridge implementation. Signalilo acts
on webhooks which it receives from Alertmanager and forwards the alerts in
those webhooks to Icinga2 using https://github.com/vshn/go-icinga2-client.

See [CHANGELOG.md](/CHANGELOG.md) for changelogs of each release version of
Signalilo.

See [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/vshn/signalilo) for pre-built Docker
images of Signalilo

## Usage

Signalilo gets started from the command line and takes its configuration
either as options or as environment variables. Use `signalilo --help` to get a
list of all available configuration parameters.

When started, Signalilo listens to HTTP requests on the following paths:

* `/webhook` Endpoint to accept alerts from Alertmanager.
* `/healthz` returns HTTP 200 with `ok` as its payload as long as the webhook
  serving loop is operational.

## Installation

Helm

    helm install --name signalilo appuio/signalilo

See https://github.com/appuio/charts/tree/master/signalilo.

Docker

    docker run --name signalilo vshn/signalilo

OpenShift

The Helm chart should work on OpenShift

## Configuration

Mandatory

* `--uuid`/`SIGNALILO_UUID`:
  UUID which identifies the Signalilo instance.
* `--icinga_hostname`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_HOSTNAME`:
  Name of the Servicehost in Icinga2.
* `--icinga_url`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_URL`:
  URL of the Icinga API.
* `--icinga_username`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_USERNAME`:
  Authentication against Icinga2 API.
* `--icinga_password`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_PASSWORD`:
  Authentication against Icinga2 API.

Optional

* `--loglevel`/`SIGNALILO_LOG_LEVEL`:
  Integer to control verbosity of logging (default: 2).
* `--icinga_insecure_tls`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_INSECURE_TLS`:
  If true, disable strict TLS checking of Icinga2 API SSL certificate
  (default: false).
* `--icinga_debug`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_DEBUG`:
  If true, enable debugging mode in Icinga client (default: false).
* `--icinga_gc_interval`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_GC_INTERVAL`:
  Interval to run Garbage collection of recovered alerts in Icinga
  (default 15m).
* `--icinga_heartbeat_interval`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL`:
  Interval to send heartbeat to Icinga (default 60s).
* `--icinga_keep_for`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_KEEP_FOR`:
  How long to keep Icinga2 services around after they transition to state OK
  (default 168h).
* `--icinga_ca`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_CA`:
  A PEM string of the trusted CA certificate for the Icinga2 API certificate.
* `--alertmanager_port`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_PORT`:
  Port on which Signalilo listens to incoming webhooks (default 8888).
* `--alertmanager_bearer_token`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_BEARER_TOKEN`:
  Incoming webhook authentication. Can be either set via `Authorization` header or in the `token` URL query parameter.
* `--alertmanager_tls_cert`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_TLS_CERT`:
  Path of certificate file for TLS-enabled webhook endpoint. Should contain the
  full chain.
* `--alertmanager_tls_key`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_TLS_KEY`:
  Path of private key file for TLS-enabled webhook endpoint. TLS is enabled
  when both TLS_CERT and TLS_KEY are set.

## Integration to Prometheus/Alertmanager.

The `/webhook` accepts alerts in the [format of Alertmanager][webhook_format].
The following Alertmanager configuration is an example taken from a Signalilo
installation on OpenShift.

    global:
      resolve_timeout: 5m
    route:
      group_wait: 30s
      group_interval: 5m
      repeat_interval: 12h
      receiver: default
      routes:
      - match:
          alertname: DeadMansSwitch
        repeat_interval: 5m
        receiver: deadmansswitch
    receivers:
    - name: default
      webhook_configs:
      - send_resolved: true
        http_config:
          bearer_token: "*****"
        url: http://signalilo.appuio-monitoring/webhook
    - name: deadmansswitch

Signalilo requires a set of information to be part of an alert. Without this
information, the check generated in Icinga will be lacking.

Required labels:

* `severity`: Must be one of `WARNING` or `CRITICAL`.

Required annotations:

* `summary` mapped to `display_name`.
* `description`: mapped to `notes`.
* `message`: mapped to `plugin_output`.

## Integration with Icinga

### Garbage Collection

Service objects in Icinga will get garbage collected (aka deleted) on a regular basis, following these rules:

* Service object is in OK state
* Last transition to OK state was more than "keep_for" ago
* UUID of app matches "vars.bridge_uuid"

All state needed for doing garbage collection is stored in Icinga service variables.

### Heartbeat

On startup, Signalilo checks if the matching heartbeat service is available in
Icinga, otherwise it exits with a fatal error. During operation, Signalilo
regularly posts its state to the heartbeat service.  If no state update was
provided, Icinga automatically marks the check as UNKNOWN.  See [Icinga2
passive checks][passive_checks] for a description of how the service object
needs to be configured.

[passive_checks]: https://wiki.vshn.net/display/VT/Icinga2+passive+checks
[webhook_format]: https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/#webhook_config.

### Custom Variables

All labels and annotations will be mapped to custom variables. Keys of Labels
will be prefixed with `label_` and keys of annotations with `annotation_`.

If the key an annotation or label starts with `icinga_` it will also be added
as custom variable but without any prefix. Since all labels and annotations
will be strings, a type information needs to be provided so that a conversion
can be done accordingly. This is done by adding the type as part of the prefix
(`icinga_<type>_`).  Current supported types are `number` and `string`.

Examples:

* `foo` -> `label_foo` or an `anotation_foo`.
* `icinga_foo_string` -> label/annotation named `foo` with value is passed
  as is.
* `icinga_bar_number` -> label/annotation named `bar` with its value is
  converted to an integer number.

In case there is a label and an annotation with the `icinga_<type>` prefix, the
value of the annotation will take precedence in the resulting set of custom
variables.

Commit message:

Update README with a section on heartbeat services

README.md, after:

# Signalilo

Signalilo is our Alertmanager to Icinga2 bridge implementation. Signalilo acts
on webhooks which it receives from Alertmanager and forwards the alerts in
those webhooks to Icinga2 using https://github.com/vshn/go-icinga2-client.

See [CHANGELOG.md](/CHANGELOG.md) for changelogs of each release version of
Signalilo.

See [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/vshn/signalilo) for pre-built Docker
images of Signalilo

## Usage

Signalilo gets started from the command line and takes its configuration
either as options or as environment variables. Use `signalilo --help` to get a
list of all available configuration parameters.

When started, Signalilo listens to HTTP requests on the following paths:

* `/webhook` Endpoint to accept alerts from Alertmanager.
* `/healthz` returns HTTP 200 with `ok` as its payload as long as the webhook
  serving loop is operational.

## Installation

Helm

    helm install --name signalilo appuio/signalilo

See https://github.com/appuio/charts/tree/master/signalilo.

Docker

    docker run --name signalilo vshn/signalilo

OpenShift

The Helm chart should work on OpenShift

## Configuration

Mandatory

* `--uuid`/`SIGNALILO_UUID`:
  UUID which identifies the Signalilo instance.
* `--icinga_hostname`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_HOSTNAME`:
  Name of the Servicehost in Icinga2.
* `--icinga_url`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_URL`:
  URL of the Icinga API.
* `--icinga_username`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_USERNAME`:
  Authentication against Icinga2 API.
* `--icinga_password`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_PASSWORD`:
  Authentication against Icinga2 API.

Optional

* `--loglevel`/`SIGNALILO_LOG_LEVEL`:
  Integer to control verbosity of logging (default: 2).
* `--icinga_insecure_tls`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_INSECURE_TLS`:
  If true, disable strict TLS checking of Icinga2 API SSL certificate
  (default: false).
* `--icinga_debug`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_DEBUG`:
  If true, enable debugging mode in Icinga client (default: false).
* `--icinga_gc_interval`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_GC_INTERVAL`:
  Interval to run Garbage collection of recovered alerts in Icinga
  (default 15m).
* `--icinga_heartbeat_interval`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL`:
  Interval to send heartbeat to Icinga (default 60s).
* `--icinga_keep_for`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_KEEP_FOR`:
  How long to keep Icinga2 services around after they transition to state OK
  (default 168h).
* `--icinga_ca`/`SIGNALILO_ICINGA_CA`:
  A PEM string of the trusted CA certificate for the Icinga2 API certificate.
* `--alertmanager_port`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_PORT`:
  Port on which Signalilo listens to incoming webhooks (default 8888).
* `--alertmanager_bearer_token`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_BEARER_TOKEN`:
  Incoming webhook authentication. Can be either set via `Authorization` header or in the `token` URL query parameter.
* `--alertmanager_tls_cert`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_TLS_CERT`:
  Path of certificate file for TLS-enabled webhook endpoint. Should contain the
  full chain.
* `--alertmanager_tls_key`/`SIGNALILO_ALERTMANAGER_TLS_KEY`:
  Path of private key file for TLS-enabled webhook endpoint. TLS is enabled
  when both TLS_CERT and TLS_KEY are set.

## Integration to Prometheus/Alertmanager.

The `/webhook` accepts alerts in the [format of Alertmanager][webhook_format].
The following Alertmanager configuration is an example taken from a Signalilo
installation on OpenShift.

    global:
      resolve_timeout: 5m
    route:
      group_wait: 30s
      group_interval: 5m
      repeat_interval: 12h
      receiver: default
      routes:
      - match:
          alertname: DeadMansSwitch
        repeat_interval: 5m
        receiver: deadmansswitch
    receivers:
    - name: default
      webhook_configs:
      - send_resolved: true
        http_config:
          bearer_token: "*****"
        url: http://signalilo.appuio-monitoring/webhook
    - name: deadmansswitch

Signalilo requires a set of information to be part of an alert. Without this
information, the check generated in Icinga will be lacking.

Required labels:

* `severity`: Must be one of `WARNING` or `CRITICAL`.

Required annotations:

* `summary` mapped to `display_name`.
* `description`: mapped to `notes`.
* `message`: mapped to `plugin_output`.

## Integration with Icinga

### Garbage Collection

Service objects in Icinga will get garbage collected (aka deleted) on a regular basis, following these rules:

* Service object is in OK state
* Last transition to OK state was more than "keep_for" ago
* UUID of app matches "vars.bridge_uuid"

All state needed for doing garbage collection is stored in Icinga service variables.

### Signalilo Heartbeat

On startup, Signalilo checks if the matching heartbeat service is available in
Icinga, otherwise it exits with a fatal error. During operation, Signalilo
regularly posts its state to the heartbeat service.  If no state update was
provided, Icinga automatically marks the check as UNKNOWN.  See [Icinga2
passive checks][passive_checks] for a description of how the service object
needs to be configured.

[passive_checks]: https://wiki.vshn.net/display/VT/Icinga2+passive+checks
[webhook_format]: https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/configuration/#webhook_config.

### Custom Variables

All labels and annotations will be mapped to custom variables. Keys of Labels
will be prefixed with `label_` and keys of annotations with `annotation_`.

If the key an annotation or label starts with `icinga_` it will also be added
as custom variable but without any prefix. Since all labels and annotations
will be strings, a type information needs to be provided so that a conversion
can be done accordingly. This is done by adding the type as part of the prefix
(`icinga_<type>_`).  Current supported types are `number` and `string`.

Examples:

* `foo` -> `label_foo` or an `anotation_foo`.
* `icinga_foo_string` -> label/annotation named `foo` with value is passed
  as is.
* `icinga_bar_number` -> label/annotation named `bar` with its value is
  converted to an integer number.

In case there is a label and an annotation with the `icinga_<type>` prefix, the
value of the annotation will take precedence in the resulting set of custom
variables.

### Heartbeat Services

Signalilo supports creating heartbeat services in Icinga. This can be used to
map alerts like the `DeadMansSwitch` which comes with `prometheus-operator`
and signals that the whole Prometheus stack is healthy.

In order for Signalilo to treat an alert as a heartbeat, the alert must have
a label `heartbeat`. Signalilo will try to parse the value of that label as a
[Go duration].  

If the value is parsed successfully, Signalilo will create a Icinga service
check with active checks enabled and with the check interval set to the the
parsed duration plus ten percent.  We add ten percent to the parsed duration
to account for network latencies etc, which could otherwise lead to flapping
heartbeat checks.


[Go duration]: https://golang.org/pkg/time/#ParseDuration
